(dramatic music)
MATT: All right, then. Good morning and welcome,
everyone, to this year's Critical Role panel.
(cheering)
MATT: Some of us have slept. Some maybe not have
fared so well, so prepare for--
AUDIENCE MEMBER: One point of exhaustion!
TRAVIS: One point of exhaustion!
(laughter)
MATT: It has begun.
LAURA: With a low constitution.
MARISHA: I already have a low charisma. That's not
good.
TRAVIS: Yeah, we played a game in between live
streams, and these are all the surviving members.
LAURA: Spoilers!
MATT: Can you imagine what would happen if you
played a game not on the stream and came in like,
"Man, that was a crazy adventure! Anyway." Sam
shows up with a new character.
LAURA: Every time the chair tips forward, I feel
like we're going to fall.
MATT: As an introduction to the panel, who here
doesn't know what Critical Role is? Raise your hand.
(cheering)
MATT: That's an impressive ratio. Critical Role is
a weekly--
MARISHA: One guy, one guy.
MATT: It's a weekly stream where us and a couple
of other voice actors play Dungeons & Dragons.
MARISHA: I'm sure he didn't hear enough about it
in line.
MATT: I'm just trying to make sure!
MARISHA: Oh, jeez, sorry. That person. Can't see.
It's blinding up here.
MATT: Yeah, that light is in our face. Anyway, we
play Dungeons & Dragons. We're voice actors. We're
huge nerds. And we're here at GenCon for the first
time!
(cheering)
MATT: Well, for some of us it's our first time,
Miss Special Bailey. Which, by the way, have you
guys read her amazing backstory article?
LAURA: I sent that to Matt. When was it that
we--?
MATT: Something like two and a half, three years
ago, yeah.
LAURA: Right when we first started playing. I was
so nervous when I sent it to him. I remember you
didn't reply right away, and I was like, (pretends
to sob).
MATT: I think it worked out okay.
MARISHA: You've been chosen for the young mothers'
club.
AUDIENCE: Trinket's the best!
MATT: (moans) I get to be a grizzly bear on the
internet. It's the weirdest shit ever.
LAURA: So what should we do on this panel?
MATT: Do you want to make this a Q&A? General
discussion hangout? That sounds fun.
LAURA: A dance party? Can it be a dance party?
MATT: Yeah, you want to start?
LAURA: What, a dance party?
MATT: Yeah.
LAURA: (beatboxes softly) Who's coming on Saturday
to our show?
TRAVIS: Who doesn't know what our show on Saturday
night is?
MARISHA and TRAVIS: What?!
MARISHA: Okay, so what our show is--
MATT: So for that one person, if you're not busy
Saturday at 8 PM, there's a way-too-big theater
that we're playing Dungeons & Dragons in that is
not at all intimidating for us. We were sent
photos of the sheer volume of chairs in that place
for us to roll dice and mess around.
TRAVIS: We're going to be naked!
MATT: Travis is going to be naked.
MARISHA: You're like the drummer in No Doubt. Just
the one naked guy.
LAURA: Should we answer questions?
MATT: Yes!
MARISHA: What is that? That was amazing.
LAURA: Oh, a wing just flew up into the air.
MATT: Oh, it's your brother.
MARISHA: Oh, it's your brother!
TRAVIS: Oh, snapdragon. That's awesome.
(cheering)
LAURA: Too bad they didn't do a Vex one.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Want to try it on?
LAURA: What! Can I? Does it fly? Can I fly?
TRAVIS: Yeah, you can fly. Get up here on the
stage.
(laughter)
MATT: Just jump off or have Gilmore push you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Gilmore's here, too!
LAURA: You guys keep talking.
TRAVIS: So do we have them line up over there?
Okay, if you have a question, Claudia's got a
microphone over there, and then we will answer the
questions. Or attack you.
MATT: Massive rough exodus.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: No running! Walk!
TRAVIS: No running! There's a Chowazord over
there. I don't know. Is that far off from what
they're called?
MARISHA: It's better.
TRAVIS: There's a Dingleberry on the loose!
MATT: Y'all feel real dumb when Pokemon
X-Y-Gold-Ruby comes out next year with a
Charzord.
MARISHA: Chowazord. I imagine it looks like a
little chow-chow.
TRAVIS: All right, while Laura's getting dressed,
we'll take on one.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hey, you guys. It's really weird
seeing you guys in person after seeing you on screen.
TRAVIS: I know. We're so much better-looking.
MATT: Curiously small.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I thought you were taller.
MARISHA: What?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I thought Travis was going to be
a little taller.
TRAVIS: What?
(laughter and applause)
TRAVIS: I've never heard that.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: You sit next to Laura, and with
the height difference, you seem so much taller.
TRAVIS: I sit on phone books!
MARISHA: Is that better? Does that make you feel
more comfortable?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: My question is, you guys played
for a long time off-stream before you guys ever
recorded on the Twitch.
LAURA: Wait, I've got to go over here.
(laughter and applause)
LAURA: Do I look as cool as I feel?
TRAVIS: No. Hold the wing out! No, more that way.
(laughter)
MATT: That's really, really cool. So your
question?
MARISHA: How has been playing on Twitch different
from playing our home game?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Has it changed decisions and
things, knowing people are going to judge
everything you do?
TRAVIS: Well, it changed it a little bit. We try
and keep the dumb pauses that would normally
happen in our seven-hour home games, where we're
eating chips and drinking all the time. And
sometimes, if it's not us, we'd get up, and walk
off into the kitchen, and eat a bunch of cookies
and shit. So we try to get rid of that stuff, but
whether we make stupid decisions? I make those
all the time.
MATT: Yeah. Vox Machina's ability to formulate a
plan and then succeed in executing it have not
changed. They've always failed, and yet somehow
succeeded in the end. But yeah, other than a
difference in small talk and probably the-- no,
Sam's always been as weird as he is. Not much has
changed beyond that. It's been nice.
LAURA: Are we talking about how weird Sam is?
MATT: How things have changed or not changed from
doing private games to the stream.
LAURA: Did we talk about all the food we ate?
Because we ate so much food.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Is that a Tiberius impression
right now?
LAURA: What?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: That your Tiberius impression
right now?
MATT: I do miss the morning D&D mimosas a little
bit. We're never going to get that back.
MARISHA: And the smoked salmon and lox.
LAURA: We had a whole brunch.
MATT: We've got to bring that back.
LAURA: I would make quiches for us.
MARISHA: Oh, that's right, the quiche!
TRAVIS: Can we go shopping right now?
(laughter)
TRAVIS: There's more emotional stuff once the
stream started, that's for sure. The first time
somebody started crying, even I was like, "What
the fuck is happening?"
MATT: That's not true. When Ashley went down
pre-stream, there was some emotion in that sequence.
MARISHA: We can remember more now than we used to
because we're playing regularly, whereas before we
played every six weeks or so. We'd take the first
30 minutes to be like, "Matt, tell us what all we
"did. Everything."
MATT: I'm so glad we're past that. Next question!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Love you guys.
MATT: Love you too!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: First, watching your show got me
actually into playing Dungeons & Dragons.
(cheering)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Given the popularity of a number
of things becoming more mainstream, the popularity
of TV shows like The League, have you guys thought
about making a TV show or web series based off
your Critical Role outside-of-character in the
game and in-character playing?
MARISHA: Reality-style?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah! Reality-style.
LAURA: I've always wanted cameras following me
around.
MARISHA: It did get talked about at one point, but
it didn't go forward. Part of it is because we
were like-- and then there is also that part where
we were like, "Ah, what's really exciting on that
"three and a half, four hours on screen, that's
awesome! We're really boring all other times. I
"don't know if we want to expose that. We're not
that cool."
MATT: Some of those cameras follow me back to my
office. They can watch me tear my hair out trying
to create interesting stories for you guys.
LAURA: See, that actually sounds more interesting.
If they follow me and Travis home, they would get
us laying on our carpet playing with Charlie.
MATT: We'd have to put pants on!
AUDIENCE MEMBERS: No, you wouldn't!
MATT: We'll see where it goes. The popularity has
been unexpected, but at the same time we want to
make sure that, if there's going to be anything
that comes out of this, that it's on-brand, and
doesn't feel like it's capitalizing on the show,
and is more a natural expansion of it. So we'll
see. We definitely don't want to jump out of the
gate and be like, "You guys like this? Well, try
"the new breakfast cereal!"
LAURA: I think that Scanlan should hawk all of
that stuff. It's on-brand for him.
TRAVIS: I think we should have some breakfast
cereal.
LAURA: Gilmore's Glorious Granola?
MATT: Vox Machi-nums?
(cheering)
MATT: You don't know what you've done, Scope!
TRAVIS: Come get at us, General Mills. We'll make
this happen.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: First of all, thank you for
coming here as, obviously, we're not in LA, so
it's nice to see you here at the con. I have a
question for Matt. I'm looking for a reliable
source of black powder somewhere in Vasselheim.
MATT: There's a guy who was on Craigslist once.
That always ends well. Actually, I think the black
powder merchant encounter is the best example you
can have of fantasy Craigslist in a D&D setting.
That's usually par for the course, which is a guy
going, "Want to buy a couch? Come and take a
"couch!" I have never had an NPC be forcefully
dragged by a community into other games. Victor
has been pulled into stuff. "Yes, anytime, please
come buy things! Learn from my mistakes!" I love
that Keyleth doesn't quite know that he's missing
limbs because she can probably fix it.
MARISHA: I don't think I've ever--
MATT: You've never met him in game, yeah. And
Percy doesn't know you haven't.
LAURA: You can fix people's limbs?
MARISHA: Yeah.
LAURA: Wait, did you have that when Vax had no
toes?
MARISHA: No.
MATT: It's a 6th- or 7th-level spell. So you lose
a finger--
TRAVIS: So I can chop off my arm.
MARISHA: Dude, it's not like-- don't-- no.
TRAVIS: I'm a great guinea pig! What if I chop off
my head?
MARISHA: It doesn't fix instant death.
MATT: You still have to be alive for it to work.
Although I will say I do love the idea of Grog
normally proportioned with one tiny baby arm
growing out.
(laughter)
MATT: Tiny hand.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: First off, thank you for what
y'all have done in letting us enjoy your show.
Thank you for playing and for letting us be a part
of that.
TRAVIS: You're welcome!
LAURA: Thank you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I have a question moreso on the
aspect of if one of the characters were ever to go down--
TRAVIS: Son of a bitch.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: --what you would bring in as your
alternate character, or in another campaign where
you can't come back. Bye, Travis.
MATT: (evil laughter)
MARISHA: It's like Survivor, man.
MATT: I like you! What would you guys want to come
back as, if you have any idea?
MARISHA: It's hard, because we want it to be a
surprise, and also I think our idea changes from
day to day. I know we've all said they'd be the
total opposites of whatever we're playing now.
TRAVIS: I'd be a tavern wench.
(laughter)
TRAVIS: I'd sleep with everybody.
TRAVIS: Sex is important!
MATT: It's a way to get experience. Just work your
way to level four, man.
LAURA: I would want magic. I want to be able to
play with magic a little more. Although I know
it's so freaking complicated.
MATT: It's really not that complicated when you
get into it! The choices are broad, yes, and that
can be a little intimidating, but once you make
those choices, especially when you pick a class
that maybe has a little more limited scope with
spell choices, like the sorcerer or bard or
something like that, it's not that bad. If you're
a wizard, then yeah, you've got to be ready to
have that encyclopedia at your disposal.
LAURA: That's why they have the book, right?
MATT: Yeah. Wizards have the book because they can
be like, "All right. What am I learning today?"
Everyone else in the party goes, "Ugh. Another
round of bacon, I guess."
LAURA: Fried chicken! Is that Percy?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: It is!
MATT: There's a Percy, that's awesome!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: It's my first attempt at a
cosplay and I forgot my jacket at home.
MATT: As long as you bring in the butt flap,
you're fine.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: First of all, hello from central
Pennsylvania. The second thing is, my little
sister would kill me, this is a letter and gift
for Laura Bailey.
LAURA: (gasps) Should I come down there?
TRAVIS: Sit down!
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: And finally, my question is for
Matt. In the campaign that I run, we're using the
gunslinger that you made. I know that you and
Taliesin worked together on a lot of his
inventions and gadgets that he makes. What's the
process you go through with him so that he can
create these amazing things like Diplomacy and Bad
News and that kind of stuff but you keep it balanced?
MATT: Right. What he'll do is he'll sketch up an
idea, whether it be an actual small drawing or
just the idea behind what he wants to create and
the effect that he wants, and he'll bring that to
me via email or personal discussion. I'll think
about it, and I'll think in terms of what could be
balanced for his level and what kind of things he
can do without it being a way-too-good ability for
his class beyond what's normally capable. For the
most part, tinkering is about utility and helpful
things, not to really strengthen the class. The
one exception was Bad News and that was the one
thing that I worked with him that he spent his
entire six-month time jump working on. Where
everyone else was having side adventures and doing
story stuff, he's like, "I spent six months in my
workshop trying to make this. I spent all my money
on it, and it still might fail on the rolls." He
managed to succeed. Once he gets the concept, I'll
go ahead and think out, many times scaling it back
to what is balanced and I'll write up what I think
it should do. Then I'll give him a series of costs
and checks he has to make for it. If it's more of
a giant, powerful, strength-based tinkering
ability where he has to manipulate a lot of heavy
metals, it'll be more of a strength-based
tinkering check where you take the tinkering bonus
and the strength modifier. If it's tinier, more
intricate clockwork-style, it's more of a
dexterity-based tinkering check. You change
whatever ability modifier applies to that roll
based on the kind of task that it is. The DC I
decide essentially based on how intricate and how
good the final product is supposed to be and how
good his rolls are if it's a progressive series of
rolls. If he keeps failing rolls, that final and
third DC check I'll make pretty damn high. So he
still has a chance to succeed, but it gets smaller
and smaller the more he fails the progressive
attempts. It's relatively fluid. It's based
case-to-case, because, honestly, the tinkering
rules are kind of vague. But they're intentionally
vague by the system so you can do what I do and
create your own way of letting them occur. I think
it's a cool system 5th edition has done, they've
given you the tools to figure out in some cases
however you want to try and make it function,
which I like.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you so much!
TRAVIS: Did you get all that?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Iron trap.
MATT: Good, good!
TRAVIS: I just heard, "Mwa mwa mwa mwa."
MATT: The point when Travis just glazes over.
LAURA: Tell your sister I said thank you! She made
this out of a quarter! I know, right?
MATT: That's really cool.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi. Maybe like a lot of people
here, thanks to Critical Role, I'm cutting my
teeth on DMing. I'm pretty long-winded as a
person, and I know that, so it works for and
against me as the DM. From your perspective, do
you ever experience when you're trying to explain
something and you're a couple of minutes into it,
you've got this awesome idea and you're trying to
explain it to your group and you find that maybe
their eyes are glazing over. It's in my head, I'm
trying to show it to you, but maybe you feel like
you're going too long. How do you balance your,
I've got to describe this scene and this area, but
what details are really pertinent?
MATT: Being concise. It's one of the things that
comes with experience as well. You may have an
extremely elaborate write-up for certain
circumstances. It's also the presentation aspect
of it, too. I've gone into a few backstory
diatribes with you guys, exposition on certain
NPCs because you would ask the right questions,
and you can still keep your attention as long as
you say it with conviction. It's the difference
between going, (monotone) "And then the gods
"created the land, and then there was the place
that happened and the people went 'yay'," and
going, (forcefully) "And then the gods created the
land, and the people went, 'Yay!'" As long as
you're engaged with the eye contact and
confidence, it'll generally keep people engaged
more often, a kind of oratory speech foundation.
Half of it's not even what you say, it's just how
you say it and being concise with the details.
When you finish writing up a description of a new
location, go back through it again and be like,
"How can I eliminate a few of these sentences? How
"can I use different adjectives?" And by the way,
thesaurus.com is your friend! Both to learn new,
cool vocabulary words, but as a way to truncate
the ideas you're trying to get across.
TRAVIS, MARISHA, and LAURA: Truncate?
MATT: Truncate. Truncate's a word! It's a good
word!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Cool.
MATT: Take a moment to go through what you've put
down and find ways to condense it a little
tighter. And when you do say it to your party,
conviction.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Cool, thank you.
MARISHA: I like that answer. Truncate. Go ahead.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: My question requires a little bit
of background. I didn't start playing D&D until
after college. I always thought of it as some sort
of competitive game, where you're competing to get
levels and loot and then one man is making
arbitrary decisions about who will succeed or not.
MATT: And Steven wins!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Exactly. It didn't make any sense
to me. Recently when I took it as more group
storytelling it really clicked. I went, "Oh,
that's awesome!" I started watching shows-- yours,
of course-- and I've learned a lot of lessons.
I've tried to take everything I can, any cool
ideas, to try to bring into my own games. The
number one thing I take from your show, believe it
or not, is I love the way you guys cheer each
other on. It's something I bring into my own games
that makes them so much better if you're
constantly cheering for one another, and I've
found that when I do it, everybody has a much
better time. My question is, do you have anything
you do, a mindset you bring in or tips and tricks
you use to make sure the experience is fun for
everybody? Because that, I think, is the most
important part, and I think you do it so well that
that's why maybe your show is greater than a lot
of people's.
MARISHA: Aw, thanks man.
TRAVIS: I remember the very first time we ever
played, Matt took me aside in some room because--
was it Laura and I were talking to that guy?
LAURA: Oh, yeah, and you intimidated him, right?
TRAVIS: He was like, "How do you want to
intimidate him?" And I was like: "I don't-- What
"was his question?"
(laughter)
TRAVIS: I was like: "Can I do anything?" And he
was like: "You can certainly try."
(laughter)
TRAVIS: We were back in the bedroom in your
apartment, right? We were waiting for the rest of
the table.
MATT: It was the whole plan.
TRAVIS: Yeah!
(laughter)
TRAVIS: I reached down, and grabbed him by the
throat, and picked him up and he was going: (makes
choking noises). I was like, wow, this is great!
(laughter)
TRAVIS: I asked him later: "Is there anything that
you don't like about certain aspects of the game?"
He's like: "Only when people play it safe. Don't
play it safe. Safe can be so boring, you know.
"It's a fantasy world, it's your imagination, there
are all these things happening. So don't play it
"safe." I'm like: "Got it."
(laughter)
LAURA: I think it also helps that the whole party,
we're all friends and we genuinely want to cheer
each other on and encourage each other. You know,
when Grog has a fight with just one other person,
we genuinely are interested and are watching it
and supporting him. And, you know, Scanlan turning
into a rhinoceros. We haven't said anything for an
hour, but it was one of the best games I remember
playing because it was so much fun to watch him do
all those crazy things.
TRAVIS: Yeah, we turned into the crowd.
MARISHA: It's kind of interesting. I'd never
really thought about it before-- you were talking
about cheering each other on. But it's kind of
like supporting your buddies at the gym. Come on,
bro. You've got this!
MATT: A few more reps. Go! Go! Go!
MARISHA: Come on! Don't quit! So I think it does
create maybe a different kind of support structure.
MATT: As a Dungeon Master, it helps to instill the
idea that, "By the way, guys, if one of you does
"poorly, that's going to mess up all of you." So
you want this guy to succeed because it only helps
all of you. It's kind of your job as a Dungeon
Master to help sculpt a story that promotes unity
in the group as well. It's fun at certain times to
instill tension in the group, it's likely to
happen naturally, but because it happens
naturally sometimes, you have to try and
facilitate that idea of everyone working together
as friends and supporting each other. So try your
best and, at least in the earlier parts of the
campaign, to not try and pit players against each
other, because it can breed unfortunate emotions.
When they're comfortable in their space, been
playing for a while, and they all have built out
the core, that's when you can tweak it here and
there for those cool story moments. But you still
want to facilitate, as the head storyteller that--
LAURA: As a Master.
MATT: As a Master, if you will. To make sure that,
to succeed and continue, friendship is the answer!
(laughter)
TRAVIS: There were moments of conflict that were
fun, though. When Percy tried to keep me from
getting the skull, we were both smiling our asses
off.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: That's another thing. Even when
you have conflict, I think a lot of times, it
tears the fucking party apart. You keep just being
able to do it and still feel okay with it.
TRAVIS: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: How do you all do that?
MARISHA: I think Matt touched on this a little
bit, but keeping in mind that there is not a whole
lot of opportunities for group co-op games. So
keep that in mind and really utilize it as a team.
I'm trying not to make it sound awful. I mean it.
Whatever, just have fun.
(laughter and applause)
MATT: Hello!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi! Welcome to GenCon or, in
Laura's case, welcome back!
LAURA: Thank you, thank you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: What do you guys think so far?
MATT: It's awesome. I've only seen the exhibition
hall peripherally, but even glancing through, I'm
like, I should have brought another piece of
luggage, man. After this, hopefully, I have this
three-hour pack where I'll be like-- and I
apologize in advance if you see me wandering, and
you approach me, and I'm like, "No, I'm fine."
It's nothing against you, it's just that I have
very short periods of time to actually enjoy the
exhibition hall, and I really, literally, just
wanted to buy everything.
(laughter)
MATT: I'm going to go broke in there.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Okay, my actual question is: What
do you think--
(laughter)
MATT: Sorry, what was that?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: So what inspired you to create
your individual characters and what drew you to
wanting to be a DM?
MATT: What inspired you to make your individual
characters?
MARISHA: What inspired us?
MATT: Yeah.
MARISHA: You go first.
TRAVIS: After one look at the Player's Handbook
and was like: "What the fuck is this?"
(laughter)
TRAVIS: This is the most complicated and
intimidating thing I've ever seen in my life. Like
cantrips and spell levels. I was like: "Matt, what
do I do just to hit things?" He said: "Well, you
"could be a fighter, or a monk, or a barbarian."
I'm like: "Barbarian! Good! They're usually dumb."
He's like: "Not necessarily." Then we rolled the
character and I got an intelligence of six, and I
was like: "Money!"
(laughter)
TRAVIS: He's named Grog, duh.
MARISHA: Is there any water in the house, Fabio?
MARISHA and LAURA: That's what we're all saying.
LAURA: I wanted to be a rogue, and I wanted to be
a half-elf. And then Liam told me he was a rogue
already. And I was really angry, and then he said
he was already a half-elf and I was also really
angry. So I asked Matt, "So the two things I'm
thinking of being are a druid or a ranger. Which
"one of these gets to have an animal?" And he said,
"Both." I was like, "Shit!" What was I saying? So
I said I'll be a ranger, and then I was like,
"Hey, Liam, I still want to be a half-elf, but we
"actually have the same birthday in real life, so
maybe we could be twins in the game, too?" And he
said, "Yeah, I like it," so we did that.
TRAVIS: Then you came up with those damn names.
LAURA: Vex has been a name that I always go to
whenever I'm playing any of my many video games. I
always like meanings, I don't know why. Vex is one
I already went to. And so: "I'm going to be
"Vex'ahlia!" and he's like: "Fine, I want to be...
Vax'ildan?" "As long as there's an apostrophe in
"it, we're good."
MATT: I think that was an early omen.
MARISHA: Was it you or Liam who was really adamant
about the apostrophes?
LAURA: Me.
MARISHA: Okay, I also had an apostrophe. I came in
last, because I actually helped the first game,
and then when it turned into a campaign, I'm like:
"Okay, yeah, if this could turn into a thing, then
"I'll join." So yeah, I didn't play in that first
game. I was Matt's assistant.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Matt's familiar.
MARISHA: I basically just pointed at stats when
they were confused: "It's right there."
(laughter)
MARISHA: So many distractions. I was also torn
between a ranger and a druid, and Matt was like,
"Well, Laura's already a ranger," and I was like:
"Cool, I'll be a druid, then."
MATT: I think you tried druid in Fourth Edition,
and you hated it.
MARISHA: I hated it. Yeah, I tried druid in Fourth
Edition. They were basically a watered-down
support class that wasn't-- they were trying to be
a jack-of-all-trades but they just sucked at
everything. I hated it, so I was like: "All right,
I'll give druids one last chance." And then she's
my long-time character. I was also like: "I'm
going to play a nice person. I never play nice
people. It's so hard to play nice people in RPGs,
but it's a one-shot."
(laughter)
MATT: I guarantee you that if Keyleth goes away or
the campaign finishes, you're going to make a
character that's--
MARISHA: Who's such a bitch. Awful. Selfish and
evil. I'm going to be on rumspringa, man!
LAURA: You'll get along with everybody, I'm sure.
MATT: To answer your question for me, I was
inspired to be a dungeon master from having a
really bad dungeon master my first six months of
playing. I loved the game, I could see the
potential for it-- the potential for
storytelling-- and the guy who was running was
just really, really, really hard to enjoy. It
wasn't about the story more than it was: "Let's go
"kill things, and also I have my own character
who's, in second edition, a paladin, but I'm also
"going to want to take the samurai fighter kit
because I'm the DM and I'm allowed to do that." So
he's a samurai paladin dual-wielding magical
katanas. And also he's got his griffon mount and
his holy sword, and his holy quest was, he woke up
and this guy went, "Here!" So yeah, it was very--
it was a pain in the ass. And to walk away was
like: "No, go! I'm going to run my own game." So
then my whole inspiration-- I was driven to do it,
because I couldn't take bad examples of it. And
then I was just fumbling in the dark for years,
going: "I guess this is how it works." This is how
most of us did it when there wasn't examples of
it. You newer folk have such an easier time of it!
You were creating a void in a vacuum. Wow, I sound
really old and crotchety now. "Oh you youngsters,
you don't know what it was like! We had to do
reverse math for AC and THAC0!" We'll assume you
appreciate you skipped that area, because I know
that was pretty quick. And that's basically my inspiration.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Two more things. One: Laura, I
share the same birthday.
LAURA: Yeah!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: And also: a few weeks ago, a
tattoo appeared on Twitter, of Critical Role, that
said "How do you want to do this" and then a
question mark.
MATT: Oh, no way! That was you?!
(laughter and applause)
MATT: We were passing this around earlier.
(laughter)
LAURA: Whoa!
MARISHA: It's all like new fresh ink.
(applause)
MARISHA: I love your shirt.
MARISHA and LAURA: "I'm Allura!"
AUDIENCE MEMBER: So my question is: if your
characters now could go back to their past selves
at the beginning of the campaign, and give them
one piece of advice--? Sort of the same thing for
Matt: as a DM, what advice would you give?
MARISHA: That's a good question.
TRAVIS: Listen to the sword.
(laughter)
LAURA: Don't let anybody else hold the carpet.
TRAVIS: She'll never let that shit go.
MARISHA: So many things.
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Be nice to the elderly!
TRAVIS: Be nice to the elderly?!
MARISHA: Stay away from children. Learn Grasping
Vine placements. That's what I would tell her. Practice.
MATT: I'd like to tell Gilmore to open shop
further east. "Don't stand there. Try Stillben,
"that's a nice time of year." I'd tell Kima to
maybe be more of a second-wave fighter-- let
everyone else go in first.
LAURA: Like, ever, Kima, every time she gets taken
out.
MATT: I know, man! She's got an awesome set of
abilities I'm always excited to use, and I'm like:
"Well, never mind. One day."
TRAVIS: Kima with the beholders, right?
MATT: Kima and beholders is not a good setup, man!
She's got a thing with eyes now. It's hate fear.
Anyone catches eye contact, she's like-- Good
question, thank you.
LAURA: Hey, presents! What is that? The story
of--
TRAVIS: It's cursed. Don't open it!
(laughter)
TRAVIS: Trap check!
LAURA: These are so cute!
MATT: There's Sam with his blue poo.
LAURA: Look, there's a beer behind you!
MATT: I got sunglasses.
LAURA: I got gold! That's awesome, thank you!
MARISHA: Oh man, it's all of us on our worst
days.
MATT: Next question. We've got a long line and not
a lot of time.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I have a present for Matt after
my question. So all of you did playlists for your
individual characters, and all of them seem really
good, but I'm wondering, just out of morbid
curiosity-- each of you-- say you had a
professional wrestler's entrance theme. What would
it be?
(laughter)
TRAVIS: I thought of that. I was in between
AC/DC's "Thunderstruck" and "Shipping Up To
"Boston." That's the first thing I thought of on
that playlist. You, sir, are a badass.
LAURA: Maybe, I don't know-- (chants) "The best
things in life are free!" I want money. That's
what I want!
MARISHA: See, I kind of had the version of
Strawberry Fields on there where it's like kind of
my thought on that. That's like the slow-mo
soundtrack that's going on in Kiki's head as she's
destroying things and stuff. Like: (singing) "Take
you down. Going to." Yeah! But if you want
something more amped up maybe like (singing) "It's
the eye of the tiger, it's the thrill of the fight."
(laughter)
MARISHA: Yeah. One easy bite.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Matt, do you have one for
Gilmore?
(laughter)
TRAVIS: (singing) I'm too sexy for my shirt.
MATT: That's a good one. That's a really good one.
But something with Aretha Franklin probably. Hell,
yeah. Respect, man. It would be awesome if
(singing) "R-E-S-P-E-C-T!"
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I have something for Matt,
because we share a love of dungeon mastering,
dwarves, and dice--
(music starts playing)
MATT: Sorry, what was the question?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: For DMing, dwarves, and dice, I
wanted to give you my Dungeon Master's dwarven dice.
MATT: Are you sure, man?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: As sure as I can be.
TRAVIS: Those are poison, too!
LAURA AND TRAVIS: Wow!
LAURA: Can we all-- I don't want to touch them.
I'm scared.
TRAVIS: They're warm!
MATT: Very nice. They're actually metal. That's
awesome!
LAURA: Roll a 20! Next question!
MATT: That's a 15. That's not bad
AUDIENCE MEMBER: (inaudible)
(laughter)
MATT: That's awesome!
TRAVIS: Pretty good one.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: But anyway, thank you guys for
being like my (inaudible).
MATT: Wow!
TRAVIS: Wait, it won't shut up? It keeps running
through the whole show? What?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: (inaudible)
MATT: That's awesome!
MARISHA: Are we speaking to you in our dream?
Because I'm sorry if that's the case.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: But anyway, if you guys could
play a different animal: what animal would you be?
And also what would be your favorite animal to
voice?
MARISHA: To what?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: To voice-over.
LAURA: To voice-over?
MATT: Okay, so what animal would your character
be, and what character do you want to voice-over.
Like an animal.
TRAVIS: I'd be a dire wolf.
LAURA: Yeah!
MARISHA: Totally. I mean, it's tough because
Keyleth goes to Minxie all the time. That's her
favorite. That's her comfy spot. Minxie! But if
not, she'd be-- I don't know. She grew up playing
as kittens and squirrels in the forest. True
story. Which is why she was weird. So I don't know.
LAURA: I think Vex and Vax would make really good
raccoons.
MATT: Yeah, actually.
TRAVIS: Trash pandas.
LAURA: Trash bin? I don't want to be a trash bin!
TRAVIS: Trash panda.
LAURA: Oh, trash panda.
(laughter)
MARISHA: Somehow better.
LAURA: We'll all be connected though the red
panda, so it's okay.
MATT: As far as me as a dungeon master? I would be
an eagle. But, you know, me as a person would
probably go mongoose or owl. But not creepy barn
owls with little beady eyes and the big round
face. We're talking great horned with an angry
eyebrow. That's the barn owl.
LAURA: Oh, I like that one!
MATT: I like that one too, but they're like--
TRAVIS: Oh my god!
(laughter)
MATT: Good question!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi! I've got a question. Thank
you very much for bringing me back into D&D after
a seven-year hiatus. I'm a local coordinator for
D&D Adventurers League now, including all new
games, DMing 32 hours over the course of the con,
and I have to leave in 15 minutes. Will you please
accept this gift on behalf of everything you've
done for it?
TRAVIS: Yes.
(laughter)
LAURA: Is it for all of us, or just Matt?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: It is for some of you, and I'm
not trying to play favorites.
LAURA: There's not one for me in there. There goes
the whole box.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: There's one in there for you,
Laura. There are two for Keyleth. There is one for
Sam, and there is one for Travis.
TRAVIS: That's Sam's. Oh shit, that looks like
me!
(laughter)
LAURA: Did you paint them yourself?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I painted those myself, yes.
LAURA: Oh my gosh. Thank you so much.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: You're welcome, Laura. The bigger
they are, the easier they are to hit. That was my
shirt. Cosmic D&D. I love you guys.
LAURA: Thank you so much!
(applause)
MATT: Thank you for continuing to bring the
stories that you create for other people. That's
fantastic, seriously.
LAURA: This is a really good Vex.
TRAVIS: We've got ten minutes. We've got to do
this fast.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I'll try to make this quick,
then. I've been playing tabletop games for several
years, and because of Critical Role and
Titansgrave, I've been inspired to set up my first
campaign this month. I'm a very shy and
introverted person, so do you have any tips for
building confidence, getting the nerve to get it
started?
LAURA: Shot of tequila.
(laughter)
TRAVIS: We'd be drinking for that first game we
played.
MARISHA: You mean for shy, introverted players?
AUDIENCE: For the DM.
LAURA: For yourself?
MARISHA: Shot of tequila.
MATT: Something to take the edge off definitely
doesn't hurt.
TRAVIS: Kill all your players!
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: If they're all dead, you can't be
embarrassed.
MATT: It's always going to be nerve-wracking that
first game. To an extent, it's still
nerve-wracking today. Still get those little
butterflies in your stomach; you just learn
through experience to harness that going forward.
What helps is to know that all the players are
there to support you, especially if you create the
right group of people that are in the right
mindset. They're all excited for the prospect of
living in the space that you create for them. Be
confident in the knowledge that they want to have
the same good time that you want them to have, as well.
Music helps. Soundtracks are great, not just for
mood and setting, but it also makes you feel like
the silence isn't being driven by you. If it's
just you talking and then nothing? That, for some
reason, is more intimidating for me as a
storyteller. Having some soundtracks or music in
the background already helps bolster your mood as
you start weaving that little tale. And listen.
Listen as a dungeon master. Because even though
the pressure is on you, in theory, to run the
game, a lot of your job is reactionary and
listening to what the players do and say and act
as, and bringing the recourse of the world
reacting to that experience. When I say it's
collaborative storytelling, it really is
collaborative. Yeah, you're the dungeon master,
but all of you are creating together, so as long
as you go in the mindset that they're putting as
much into this as you are-- though you may have
most of the preparation-- and you listen to what
they're doing, you'll find yourself a little more
confident in that knowledge as you go forward.
I hope some of that helps. There are many things
you can try; I'm sure there are other communities
out there that can give even more elaborate
responses, but off the top of my head, those are
some things.
TRAVIS: Good question.
MATT: No worries. Good luck!
(applause)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hey, I'm Chris.
LAURA: Hey, what's up?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: So when they talked about the
wrestler theme song, I merely thought of Vax's as,
(singing) "Hello, darkness, my old friend..."
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: My question is, what is the most
satisfying moment each of your characters have had
in-game?
LAURA: Most satisfying.
MATT: Most satisfying moment for each of your
characters.
MARISHA: Kicking a beholder in the face was pretty
awesome, as an earth elemental. Also, rocketing
from the sky as an earth elemental meteor was
pretty awesome. Also cannonballing as an earth elemental--
(laughter)
MARISHA: Mainly, when I'm an earth elemental, it's
dope.
(laughter)
TRAVIS: I loved not dying at Kevdak's hand and
getting scooped up into the necklace-- not
Pokeball-- and getting air-dropped out. I had like
four hit points. I was like, "Fuck it, I'm going
"to die. Let's go out in a blaze of glory." And a
natural 20 happened! It was skin of my ass.
MATT: I still can't believe that.
TRAVIS: I know!
MATT: I was watching that battle unfold, going,
"Oh..."
TRAVIS: I watched it afterwards, and I almost tore
my shirt open.
(laughter)
MARISHA: How many pencils have you broken now?
Three? Yeah.
MATT: Laura?
LAURA: I don't know. I don't know.
TRAVIS: It's just a satisfying moment. It's not a
test.
LAURA: I mean, scooping you up in the necklace was
pretty cool. Like flying out and doing that.
TRAVIS: That was pretty dope.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Becoming royalty!
LAURA: Yeah, that was pretty cool.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Talking to Trinket!
LAURA: And I guess you guys are all caught up on
the show, right? I can say that out loud?
(laughter)
LAURA: To be fair, that was pretty awesome. That
wasn't my doing, though, but it was still pretty sexy.
MATT: I don't want to spoil too much just in case
people are behind, but there is a location in the
world that I spent a lot of time fleshing out and
designing with a lot of characters and structure,
and then in one fell swoop just tearing it down.
Very weirdly cathartic. It's like spending hours
building a sand castle, then just jumping on it.
It's weirdly human. I made this! Hah!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Like playing Jenga!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: My question is actually about
LARPing, Have you guys ever done it, would you
ever want to do it? For the new intro, you dressed
up as all your characters and had a lot of fun
doing that.
TRAVIS: It was cold as shit.
MATT: I've LARPed a little bit in Vampire the
Masquerade. I didn't come in with a great
experience unfortunately, because I came into a
very well-run, long-running group of like 40
people in Simi Valley and LA. I got thrown into
the middle of a direct political struggle as a
very important political figure with no idea about
how any of the political structure works. Everyone
turned to me and was like, "You are the prince's
new friend, tell me how the--" and I was like, "I
don't know what's going on! Sure, that guy." It
was a little stressful. As far as fantasy LARPing,
I haven't done it yet. I know one of these days I
will. I'm scared to do it because I know I'll
enjoy it far too much and I have so little free
time as it is. It's going to be one of those
things where I'm like, "What else can I give up to
make this happen? Sure, I don't need to eat!" But
I will probably get too into it if I did.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Come do Madness with Cthulhu!
MARISHA: I was going to say the three of us have
kind of casually LARPed for the Call of Cthulhu
party that Matt had.
LAURA: That's true, we did!
MATT: That's true, yeah. I tricked you guys into
LARPing.
MARISHA: Yeah.
(laughter)
LAURA: That was my first experience with anything
like that.
TRAVIS: It was awesome!
MATT: I ran a 1920s-style Cthulhu-based birthday
party and wrote everyone character stories, and
they all came in costume and, once everyone
arrived, in-character spent the next four hours
solving puzzles and wandering the house,
discovering ways to get the story--
LAURA: And it all went to shit because everybody
started hoarding all the secrets for themselves.
MATT: Yeah. It turned into a Mexican standoff.
Yuri pulled out his Tommy Gun prop that he brought
in a--
MARISHA: That was what was crazy. We were like--
everyone was pulling out their weapons.
LAURA: He was a gangster, wasn't he?
MATT: Yeah. He was a secret enforcer who showed up
with a giant violin case and was like, "I'm the musician."
(laughter)
MATT: Then he pulled out a Tommy Gun and it was
between him and Leo, they all started pulling guns
on each other and it was a giant standoff.
MARISHA: We were like, where did these come from?
We did not bring these or provide these. It was a
perfect allegory, like it could have been a social
experiment for how the world's going to end. I
swear to God it went very poorly, very fast.
MATT: The answer is devoured by the argument.
MARISHA: Yes.
LAURA: The questions are the main thing.
MATT: You guys did awesome. Good question!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hello. First, for Travis, go
Cowboys!
TRAVIS: Yeah! Cowboys!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: And I've got a question for most
of you, or all of you, but it's mostly towards
Matt. But first I have to ask, do you guys like
Disney movies, animated movies and Pixar movies?
ALL: Yes.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Which Disney-animated character
besides Maleficent would you pick to be the best
one to fight in a D&D campaign?
MARISHA: Besides Maleficent?
LAURA: Ooh, Ursula!
MARISHA: You know, I think Cruella de Vil would be
an interesting kind of, not necessarily
damage-dealing, but you have to kind of intrigue
around it. Cruella de Vil as a boss would be cool.
TRAVIS: I would fist-fight Gaston.
(cheering)
MATT: So you start with Cruella de Vil, which
leads into a confrontation with Gaston, which then
goes to the ultra-villain Ursula, who you think is
the main villain, until you defeat her and the
mountain explodes and Chernobog arises.
(laughter)
LAURA: Hello!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I just want to say thank you,
guys, you're awesome.
MATT: You're awesome!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I met you last night, too.
MATT: I know, that's how I know you're awesome!
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I have a voice actor question.
About a year ago, I was playing Elder Scrolls
Online, and I met a tree that sounds like Grog.
Does it happen to you guys a lot? Like, you're
playing a game and you hear, "Oh, I know that
guy."
TRAVIS: (Grog voice) Yes.
(laughter)
LAURA: Yeah, pretty much. There's no game you can
play now that you're not like, oh, hey Matt, hey again.
MARISHA: Shut up, Troy. That's my favorite, is
being like, "Oh, shut up, Grog." And screaming.
LAURA: But what is surprising, when you know
somebody, like I know Matt or something, and then
I find out he was the voice and I had no idea.
That's always really fun. To know somebody so well
and they can still surprise you with these voices
they have. Oh, are we out of time?
MODERATOR: Yeah, this one's going to be the last
one.
TRAVIS: Last one. Sorry, guys.
MATT: I know, it's okay.
LAURA: I know, I'm sorry!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: It's funny, because that has
something to do with my question. How tomorrow is,
or other times you play D&D live on stage, how do
you deal with nervousness? Me, I get hiccups or
burps like you guys did at the first live show.
LAURA: Oh, I get burps all the time.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: How do you guys deal with nerves
without the alcohol?
(laughter)
LAURA: How do you deal with the nerves without
alcohol?
MATT: Because I don't drink at the games, because
I'm not allowed to, I'm the Dungeon Master. For me--
MARISHA: Point of order: we didn't do that. You
chose that.
(laughter)
MATT: A lot of it stems from a theatre background,
and there's something about just being on stage
that, the nerves are there. You learn to harness
that energy, in a way. They never really go away.
I think you'll all agree, even getting up for--
all of us have been doing stage for years and
years and years, and you at E3, going on to talk
about Gears! Like, how nervous was that?
LAURA: Oh, I was so nervous! So many people!
MATT: It never goes away, and so the best thing
you can do is do your best to harness that energy
and turn it into excitement. There's no real trick
to it, besides for some people alcohol, I guess,
but just learning--
(laughter)
MATT: Learning to know you're there for a reason,
and that people are there to support you, and not
tear you down. And there's something exciting
about that.
LAURA: And usually, once you get through that
initial moment, you'll have the nerves-- like
whenever I would do musicals, my voice would crack
in my very first song, because I was so nervous
that I couldn't contain it, that I would always
crack, and then after that crack was done, I knew
the rest of the show was going to be the bomb,
because I've gotten it out of my system, and I was
fine. So you just lay into it, get it out of the
way, and then everything else will be fine after that.
MARISHA: What they said.
(applause)
LAURA: The box office is still open for the live
show, if anybody hasn't got tickets. Those are
still available, you can still come and see us
tomorrow night and--
TRAVIS: What's the name of the theater called,
it's the...?
MODERATOR: Murat Theater. Walking distance.
TRAVIS: Walking distance.
MATT: Wizards of the Coast gave us a bunch of
packages of gifts that we're going to give out to
people at the live show.
(cheering)
TRAVIS: Ashley will be there.
LAURA: Yeah, Ashley will be there!
(cheering)
MATT: Yeah. And for those of you with your
questions, I do have a panel at 3:00 this
afternoon, video game voiceover. You're welcome to
come and bring any left over Critical Role
questions as well that I'm capable of answering.
MARISHA: That poor panel.
LAURA: I know.
MATT: It's just me.
MARISHA: Oh, it's just you? Never mind, then. And
yes, Matt and I are now signing at the Green Ronin booth--
MATT: At 12:30.
MARISHA: At 12:30 to 1:30.
LAURA: We're signing at 3:00, right during Matt's
panel. Sorry. Right during Matt's panel.
TRAVIS: We're more important than Matt!
(laughter)
MATT: It's true. Thank you so much for coming,
enjoy the rest of your GenCon, we'll see you
around, and we love you!
(cheering)
[elevator music]